# Enhancing-Credit-Scoring-Models-Through-Time-Series-Clustering
Experian’s credit-scoring product, Banking and Finance Delphi for New Business Generation 11 (Delphi) is widely used by UK lenders to assess consumer credit risk. It employs 1,600 aggregated attributes from multiple credit bureau datasets to predict the probability of default and score risk. However, Delphi’s attributes are based on a static snapshot of a consumer’s credit file, neglecting changes in credit behavior over time.
This project hypothesized that the evolution of consumer credit behavior is a significant factor in default prediction, a factor overlooked by Delphi’s attributes. To validate this hypothesis, the project aimed to compete with Delphi’s default prediction performance, using time-series attributes from the CAIS dataset. This dataset spans 72 months and contains detailed account data for 313,513 consumers.
The methodology comprised two experimental stages. The first experiment clusters whole time-series data to derive cluster-based distance attributes. These attributes are then employed in a Random Forest classifier to predict default probability. The second experiment uses subsequence clustering to generate similar distance attributes, which are then used in a Logistic Regression classifier to predict default probability. For a baseline comparison, Delphi’s summary attributes are also implemented in a Logistic Regression classifier.
The second experiment outperformed the Delphi model, demonstrating higher recall (82.61% vs. 70.68%), F1-score (68.17% vs. 67.98%), AUC (91.97% vs. 90.47%), and Gini (83.93% vs. 80.93%). Transition analysis further validated the hypothesis by showing that a consumer’s credit journey significantly impacts their default rate. Additionally, the clustering of multivariate time-series data improved explainability, by capturing variable interactions.
The results underscore the importance of incorporating behavioral changes into credit-scoring models. These findings have been presented to Data Labs and team stakeholders. 
